Rust: Add a README.md (#17426)
github/codeql: rust/README.md

# Rust on CodeQL

> 

Reviewer: I'd put a warning about this being experimental and unsupported, just in case

Author: Done.

## Development

### Dependencies

> At present you need to be in the `rust-experiment` branch (or a branch on top of that) in both the `semmle-code` and `codeql` repos.

Reviewer: I'd scratch this: in any case this README is on this branch, so this information seems redundant. And once we merge to `main`, we've got nothing to update if this line is not present :slightly_smiling_face:

Author: True, but I was hit by the gotcha of having only checked out the right branch on `codeql` this morning.

When do we plan to merge to `main`?

Author: I've removed the note.

> TODO: are there any dependencies that aren't already CodeQL dependencies?  bazel and rustc?

Reviewer: for bazel if one has the internal repo they can use `tools/bazel`. Otherwise [bazelisk](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazelisk) can be used as well. When building with this command no dependency on rust/cargo is there (everything is provided for by `bazel`)

Author: I've added the link to Bazelisk.

Author: I'm never quite sure which bits of dev env setup are required vs optional, but we'll go with it.  Thanks.

### Building the Rust Extractor

This approach uses a released `codeql` version and is simpler to use for QL development. From your `semmle-code` directory run:
```bash
bazel run @codeql//rust:rust-installer
```
You now need to create a [per-user CodeQL configuration file](https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/codeql-cli/using-the-advanced-functionality-of-the-codeql-cli/specifying-command-options-in-a-codeql-configuration-file#using-a-codeql-configuration-file) and specify the option:
```

> --search-path Users/YOURUSERNAME/semmle-code/ql

Reviewer: I'm guessing this does not need an absolute path and gets joined with the home directory?

Author: It's a bit fussy.  `--search-path ./ql` works, I have a distaste for using the "current working directory" in a context like this where I'm not in control of it, but if someone can promise it will always be `semmle-code` then I'm OK with it.  `--search-path ~/semmle-code/ql` and a few other variations of that I tried do not work.

Reviewer: yeah, I think I always used full absolute paths. Maybe I'd just put a generic `/path/to/semmle-code/ql`? `Users` is macos only, and in any case my local checkout for example is at `/workspaces/semmle-code` in codespace style

Author: Updated.

```

> (or wherever the `ql` directory is on your system)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(or wherever the `codeql` checkout is on your system)
```
(this works also when `codeql` is checked out not as a `semmle-code` submodule)

# Rust on CodeQL

> [!WARNING]
> Rust support for CodeQL is experimental. No support is offered. QL and database interfaces will change and break without notice or deprecation periods.

## Development

### Dependencies

If you don't have the `semmle-code` repo you may need to install Bazel manually, e.g. from https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazelisk.

### Building the Rust Extractor

This approach uses a released `codeql` version and is simpler to use for QL development. From your `semmle-code` directory run:
```bash
bazel run @codeql//rust:rust-installer
```
You now need to create a [per-user CodeQL configuration file](https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/codeql-cli/using-the-advanced-functionality-of-the-codeql-cli/specifying-command-options-in-a-codeql-configuration-file#using-a-codeql-configuration-file) and specify the option:
```
--search-path PATH/TO/semmle-code/ql
```
(wherever the `codeql` checkout is on your system)

You can now use the Rust extractor e.g. to run Rust tests from the command line or in VSCode.

### Building the Rust Extractor (as a sembuild target)

> This approach allows you to build a Rust extractor with a CLI built from source. From your `semmle-code` directory run:

Reviewer 2: Presumably one needs to be on the `rust-experiment` branch?

Reviewer: yes, but we opted to remove the line as we'll all be in `main` pretty soon, I promise! :wink:
